# Mining Fuzzy Frequent Spatial Patterns in Geo-referenced Fuzzy Transactional Databases

## 1. What is Fuzzy Frequent Spatial pattern mining?

Geo-referenced transactional database represents the data generated by a set of stationary sensors (or objects) observing a particular phenomenon over a time period. Useful information that can facilitate the users to achieve socio-economic development lies hidden in the data. Past works focused on finding frequently occurring spatial patterns (i.e., patterns in which objects are neighbors to one another) in a binary geo-referenced transactional database. A key limitation of these studies is that they fail to discover interesting spatial regularities that may exist in a quantitative (or non-binary) geo-referemced transactional database. Fuzzy frequent spatial pattern mining was introduced to tackle this problem.


Fuzzy frequent spatial pattern mining converts the given quantitative geo-referenced transactional database into a fuzzy geo-referenced transactional database using a set of user-defined fuzzy functions, and mines this database to discover all patterns that satisfy the user-specified **minimum support** (*minSup*) and **maximum distance** (*maxDist*) constraints. The **minSup** controls the minimum number of transactions that a pattern must appear in a database. The *maxDist* controls the maximum distance between any two objects in a pattern.


Reference: P. Veena, B. S. Chithra, R. U. Kiran, S. Agarwal and K. Zettsu, "Discovering Fuzzy Frequent Spatial Patterns in Large Quantitative Spatiotemporal databases," 2021 IEEE International Conference on Fuzzy Systems (FUZZ-IEEE), 2021, pp. 1-8, doi: 10.1109/FUZZ45933.2021.9494594. [Link](https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/9494594)

## 2. What is a fuzzy transactional database?

A fuzzy transactional database is a collection of transactions, where each transaction contains a set of fuzzy items and their respective fuzzy (or probability) values.  Please note that the fuzzy values of a fuzzy item will always lie between (0,1) or (0%, 100%).

Given a quantitative transactional database containing the items,  *a, b, c, d, e, f and g*, and  a set of fuzzy membership labels, Low (L), Medium (M), and High (H), a generated hypothetical fuzzy database is shown below.A fuzzy database is a collection of transactions, where each transaction contains a transaction-identifier, set of items, and its fuzzy values respectively. 

A hypothetical utility database with items **_a, b, c, d, e, f and g_** and its fuzzy values are shown below:

| Transactions                                      |
|---------------------------------------------------|
| (a.L,0.2) (b.M,0.3) (c.H,0.1) (g.M,0.1)           |                          
| (b.M,0.3) (c.H,0.2) (d.L,0.3) (e.H,0.2)           |                          
| (a.L,0.2) (b.M,0.1) (c.H,0.3) (d.L,0.4)           |                          
| (a.L,0.3) (c.H,0.2) (d.L,0.1) (f.M,0.2)           |                          
| (a.L,0.3) (b.M,0.1) (c.H,0.2) (d.L,0.1) (g.M,0.2) |                    
| (c.H,0.2) (d.L,0.2) (e.H,0.3) (f.M,0.1)           |                          
| (a.L,0.2) (b.M,0.1) (c.H,0.1) (d.L,0.2)           |                          
| (a.L,0.1) (e.H,0.2) (f.M,0.2)                     |
| (a.L,0.2) (b.M,0.2) (c.H,0.4) (d.L,0.2)           |
| (b.M,0.3) (c.H,0.2) (d.L,0.2) (e.H,0.2)           |

__Note:__  Duplicate items must not exist in a transaction.

## 3. What is the acceptable format of a fuzzy database in PAMI?

Each row in a fuzzy transactional database must contain list of fuzzy items, colon as a seperator, and their list of fuzzy values. <br>
- Colon ':' must be used as a seperator to distinguish fuzzy items and their fuzzy values. This seperator is fixed and cannot be over-written by the users.
- fuzzy items and fuzzy values have to be seperated from each other with a delimitar. The default delimitar is 'tab space,' however, users can over-ride this default seperator.

A sample fuzzy transactional database file, say [fuzzyTransactionalDatabase.txt](fuzzyTransactionalDatabase.txt), is provided below:

a.L b.M c.H g.M:0.2 0.3 0.1 0.1 <br>
b.M c.H d.L e.H:0.13 0.2 0.3 0.2 <br>
a.L b.M c.H d.L:0.2 0.1 0.3 0.4 <br>
a.L c.H d.L f.M:0.3 0.2 0.1 0.2 <br>
a.L b.M c.H d.L g.M:0.3 0.1 0.2 0.1 0.2 <br>
c.H d.L e.H f.M:0.2 0.2 0.3 0.1 <br>
a.L b.M c.H d.L:0.2 0.1 0.1 0.2 <br>
a.L e.H f.M:0.1 0.2 0.2 <br>
a.L b.M c.H d.H:0.2 0.2 0.4 0.2 <br>
b.M c.H d.L e.H:0.3 0.2 0.2 0.2 <br>


For more information on how to create a fuzzy transactional database from a quantitative (or utility) transactional database, please refer to the manual [utility2FuzzyDB.pdf](utility2FuzzyDB.pdf)

## 4. What is a neighborhood database?

A neighborhood database contains items and their neighbors. An item *x* is said to be a neighbor of *y* if the distance between *x* and *y* is no more than the user-specified *maximum distance* threshold value.<br>

A hypothetical neighborhood database containing the items **_a, b, c, d, e, f and g_** is shown below.

| Items | neighbours |
| --- | --- |
| a | b, c, d |
| b | a, e, g |
| c | a, d | 
| d | a, c |
| e | b, f |
| f | e, g |
| g | b, f |

## 5. What is the acceptable format of a spatial database in PAMI?



The format of the neighborhood database is similar to that of a transactional database. That is, each transaction must contain a set of items. In a transaction, the first item represents the key item, while the remaining items represent the neighbors of the first item. 

A sample neighborhood file, say [sampleNeighbourFile.txt](sampleNeighbourFile.txt), is provided below:

a b c d <br>
b a e g<br>
c a d<br>
d a c<br>
e b f<br>
f e g<br>
g b f <br>

For more information on how to create a neighborhood file for a given dataset, please refer to the manual of [creating neighborhood file](neighborhoodCreation.pdf).

## 6. What is the need for understanding the statisctics of database of a fuzzy transactional database?

To understand about the database. The below code will give the detail about the transactional database.
* Total number of transactions (Database size)
* Total number of unique items in database
* Minimum lenth of transaction that existed in database
* Average length of all transactions that exists in database
* Maximum length of transaction that existed in database
* Standard deviation of transaction length
* Variance in transaction length
* Sparsity of database

The below sample code prints the statistical details of a database.

```python
import PAMI.extras.dbStats.fuzzyDatabaseStats as stats 
obj = stats.fuzzyDatabaseStats('fuzzyTransactionalDatabase.txt', ' ') 
obj.run() 
obj.printStats() 
```

## 7. What are the input parameters to be specified for a fuzzy frequent spatial pattern mining algorithm?

The input parameters to a fuzzy frequent pattern mining algorithm are: 
* __Fuzzy transactional database__  <br> Acceptable formats:
> * String : E.g., 'fuzzyDatabase.txt'
> * URL  : E.g., https://u-aizu.ac.jp/~udayrage/datasets/fuzzyDatabases/fuzzy_T10I4D100K.csv
> * DataFrame with the header titled 'Transactions' and 'fuzzyValues'

* __Spatial database__  <br> Acceptable formats:
> * String : E.g., 'spatialDatabase.txt'
> * URL  : E.g., https://uaizu.ac.jp/~udayrage/datasets/fuzzyDatabases/neighbour_T10I4D100K.csv
> * DataFrame with the header titled 'item' and 'Neighbours'

* __minSup__ should be mentioned in 
> * __count (beween 0 to length of database)__
> * [0,1]
* __seperator__ <br> default seperator is '\t' (tab space)

## 8. How to store the output of a fuzzy frequent spatial pattern mining algorithm?
The patterns discovered by a fuzzy frequent spatial pattern mining algorithm can be saved into a file or a data frame.

## 9. How to run a fuzzy frequent spatial pattern mining algorithm in a terminal?

* Download the PAMI source code from github.
* Unzip the PAMI source code folder.
* Enter into fuzzySpatialFrequentPattern folder.

```console
foo@bar: cd PAMI/fuzzySpatialFrequentPattern/basic
```

* Execute the python program on the terminal using the following syntax:

```console
foo@bar: python3 algorithmName.py inputFile outputFile neighbourFile minSup seperator
```

__Example:__ python3 `FFSPMiner.py` `inputFile.txt` `outputFile.txt` `neighbourFile.txt` `5` `' '`

## 10. How to execute a fuzzy frequent spatial pattern mining algorithm in a Jupyter Notebook?

- Install the PAMI package from the PYPI repository by executing the following command:   **pip3 install PAMI**
* Run the below sample code by making necessary changes

```python
import PAMI.fuzzyFrequentSpatialPattern.basic.FFSPMiner_old as alg

iFile = 'fuzzyTransactionalDatabase.txt'  # specify the input fuzzy database 
minSup = 4  # specify the minSup value 
seperator = ' '  # specify the seperator of input file 
oFile = 'fuzzySpatialPatterns.txt'  # specify the output file name
nFile = 'sampleNeighbourFile.txt'  # specify the neighbour file of database

obj = alg.FFSPMiner(iFile, nFile, minSup, seperator)  # initialize the algorithm 
obj.startMine()  # start the mining process 
obj.save(oFile)  # store the patterns in file 
df = obj.getPatternsAsDataFrame()  # Get the patterns discovered into a dataframe
obj.printResults()  # Print the statistics of mining process
```

    Total number of Spatial Fuzzy Frequent Patterns: 5
    Total Memory in USS: 97611776
    Total Memory in RSS 137400320
    Total ExecutionTime in seconds: 0.0022003650665283203



```terminal
!cat fuzzySpatialPatterns.txt
#format: fuzzyFrequentSpatialPattern:support
```

    a.L : 5.4 
    b.L : 5.6 
    d.L : 6.199999999999999 
    d.L	c.L : 5.4 
    c.L : 7.0 



```python
df #database contains the following information
```




<div>
<style scoped>
    .dataframe tbody tr th:only-of-type {
        vertical-align: middle;
    }

    .dataframe tbody tr th {
        vertical-align: top;
    }

    .dataframe thead th {
        text-align: right;
    }
</style>
<table border="1" class="dataframe">
  <thead>
    <tr style="text-align: right;">
      <th></th>
      <th>Patterns</th>
      <th>Support</th>
    </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
    <tr>
      <th>0</th>
      <td>a.L</td>
      <td>5.4</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>1</th>
      <td>b.L</td>
      <td>5.6</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>2</th>
      <td>d.L</td>
      <td>6.199999999999999</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>3</th>
      <td>d.L c.L</td>
      <td>5.4</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>4</th>
      <td>c.L</td>
      <td>7.0</td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>
</div>


